



Delay/Disruption Tolerant Networking                            E. Kline
Internet-Draft                                Aalyria Technologies, Inc.
Intended status: Informational                          24 November 2025
Expires: 28 May 2026


    Assignment of Ethernet Parameters for Bundle Transfer Protocol -
                  Unidirectional (BTP-U) over Ethernet
                      draft-ek-dtn-ethernet-latest

Abstract

   This memo requests Ethernet parameters for Bundle Transfer Protocol -
   Unidirectional [BTP-U] for use on Ethernet and Ethernet-like links.
   This is not intended to replace existing IP-based Convergence Layer
   (CLs).  Rather this makes it possible to use Ethernet with BTP-U as a
   CL in environments where Ethernet-like operation better matches the
   network infrastructure or operational constraints.

About This Document

   This note is to be removed before publishing as an RFC.

   The latest revision of this draft can be found at
   https://ekline.github.io/draft-dtn-ethernet/draft-ek-dtn-
   ethernet.html.  Status information for this document may be found at
   https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-ek-dtn-ethernet/.

   Discussion of this document takes place on the Delay/Disruption
   Tolerant Networking Working Group mailing list (mailto:dtn@ietf.org),
   which is archived at https://mailarchive.ietf.org/arch/browse/dtn/.
   Subscribe at https://www.ietf.org/mailman/listinfo/dtn/.

   Source for this draft and an issue tracker can be found at
   https://github.com/ekline/draft-dtn-ethernet.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 28 May 2026.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2025 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Revised BSD License text as
   described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Revised BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction
     1.1.  Congestion Control
     1.2.  Relationship to Other Convergence Layers
   2.  Assignment of an EtherType by IEEE
   3.  IANA Considerations
     3.1.  EtherType
     3.2.  Multicast MAC Address
   4.  Operational Considerations
     4.1.  Checksums
     4.2.  BTP-U Channels
     4.3.  MTU and Jumbo Frames
     4.4.  Fragmentation and Segmentation
     4.5.  Filtering
   5.  Security Considerations
   6.  References
     6.1.  Normative References
     6.2.  Informative References
   Acknowledgments
   Author's Address

1.  Introduction

   When two Bundle nodes are connected by an Ethernet link, or by a
   technology that emulates Ethernet, it may be possible for a Bundle
   Protocol Agent to transmit Bundles in the payload of an Ethernet
   frame without higher layer protocol Convergence Layer (CL) overhead.
   Examples of "Ethernet-like" Technologies include Digital Video
   Broadcast Generic Stream Encapsulation ([DVB-GSE]).

   This memo recommends use of Bundle Transfer Protocol - Unidirectional
   [BTP-U] for this purpose and requests some Ethernet parameters to
   support this.  Specifically, it requests: an EtherType for
   identifying frames carrying BTP-U payloads (3.1) and a multicast MAC
   address, for indicating the frame is addressed to all BTP-U capable
   receivers (3.2).

   While hypothetically applicable to a physical Ethernet LAN, it may be
   better utilized within Virtual Private Cloud (VPC) networks, which
   allow novel software-define connectivity among a set of cooperating
   Bundle processing cloud compute nodes (i.e. VMs).  Such deployments
   can be useful for mission modeling, testbed activities, and may also
   integrate well with some Ground-Station-as-a-Service (GSaaS) network
   infrastructure.

1.1.  Congestion Control

   BTP-U lacks a congestion control mechanism and presumes the sending
   rate is controlled by a lower layer or mechanism otherwise out of
   scope for BTP-U.

   Ethernet flow control mechanisms exist but, even if in use, they may
   not be sufficient to avoid significant loss of BTP-U frames in all
   situations.  Additionally, a Bundle Protocol Agent may not be able to
   easily determine whether any Ethernet-level flow control mechanism is
   available.

   For deployments where congestion control cannot be managed by a
   mechanism outside of BTP-U, network operators must consider alternate
   Convergence Layers.

1.2.  Relationship to Other Convergence Layers

   This "Ethernet Convergence Layer" is not intended to replace IP-based
   CLs where their use would be more appropriate.  While use of direct
   encapsulation within an Ethernet frame avoids incurring some IP and
   UDP/TCP header overhead (28 to 48 bytes, or more, depending on
   Internet Protocol version and other options).  These savings,
   however, are not the primary motivation.  Rather, some Bundle
   Protocol deployments utilize links which may not have any operational
   IP addressing or routing.

   Convergence Layers like [TCPCL] and [DGRAMCL] have many useful
   features and remain recommended wherever deployable.  This may
   include some links where only IPv6 Link-Local Addresses are
   available, though how a Bundle Protocol Agent obtains the IPv6 Link-
   Local Address of a peer is a deployment-specific matter.

2.  Assignment of an EtherType by IEEE

   The IESG is requested to approve applying to the IEEE Registration
   Authority for an EtherType for BTP-Y.  The IESG should communicate
   its approval to IANA and to those concerned with this document.  IANA
   will forward the IESG Approval to the registry expert of the
   "EtherType" registry from the "IEEE 802 Numbers" registry group who
   will make the application to the IEEE Registration Authority, keeping
   IANA informed.

3.  IANA Considerations

   Allocation of the following Ethernet parameters is requested.

3.1.  EtherType

   (if approved) The following entry has been added to the "ETHER TYPES"
   subregistry of the "IEEE 802 Numbers" registry [IANA-IEEE802]:

   Ethertype (decimal): YYYY Ethertype (hex): YYYY Exp. Ethernet
   (decimal): - Exp. Ethernet (octal): - Description: BTP-U payloads
   References: RFC ZZZZ (this document)

3.2.  Multicast MAC Address

   In order to identify "all Bundle Transfer Protocol - Unicast over
   Ethernet capable receivers" within a broadcast domain, IANA is
   requested to allocate one Multicast MAC address.

   Following the recommended format given as the EUI-48 Identifier
   template in [RFC9542]:

   Applicant Name: IETF DTN Working Group

   Applicant Email: dtn@ietf.org

   Applicant Telephone: (none)

   Use Name: Bundle Transfer Protocol - Unidirectional

   Document: [BTP-U]

   This memo is an application for one multicast EUI-48 identifier.

4.  Operational Considerations

   In addition to issue around congenstion control and lack of feedback
   about excess sending rate noted above (1.1), some addition
   operational considerations are noted below.

4.1.  Checksums

   To reiterate the observation in ยง3.5 of [DGRAMCL], the Bundle
   Protocol specifications assume that Bundles "are transmitted over an
   erasure channel, i.e., a channel that either delivers packets
   correctly or not at all".

   Ethernet's Frame Check Sequence (FCS) minimally meets this
   requirement to ensure Bundles are not corrupted in transmission.  Use
   of stronger integrity checks are left to BTP-U.

4.2.  BTP-U Channels

   All [BTP-U] Transfers are implicitly scoped to a "virtual channel"
   within which a given Transfer Number is unique (modulo 32-bit roll-
   over).  In the case of an Ethernet frame containing the EtherType
   value given in 3.1, the virtual channel is identified by the
   combination of the Source MAC address, Destination MAC address, and
   optional C-VLAN ID (if present).

   Other Ethernet-like link-layer protocols must define the combination
   of elements that identify a virtual channel whenever specifying use
   of this EtherType 3.1.  In principle this would comprise a source
   identifier, a destination identifer, and any additional elements or
   extensions specific to the given protocol that distinguish one
   logical link-layer "channel" from another.  The exact details are out
   of scope of this document.

4.3.  MTU and Jumbo Frames

   Implementations must support transmission and reception of frames
   with payload sizes up to 1500 octets (standard Ethernet MTU minus
   Ethernet header), as required by [IEEE802dot3].  Implementations may
   support jumbo frames with payload sizes up to 9000 octets or larger,
   but should only enable this capability when explicitly configured by
   operators who have verified that the network path supports the larger
   frame size.

   MTU mismatches in Ethernet networks result in frame drops, and
   [BTP-U] does not have any mechanism to probe for Path MTU.
   Implementations may use Ethernet-specific protocols, like Link Layer
   Discovery Protocol (LLDP), to discover supported frame sizes on
   directly connected links, but should default to conservative MTU
   values (1500 octets).

4.4.  Fragmentation and Segmentation

   When transmitting Bundles that exceed the Ethernet CL's MTU, a BP
   agent must decide how to break up a Bundle into multiple
   transmissible frames.  Both [BPv7] Fragmentation and [BTP-U]
   Segmentation may be viable options.  However, Bundle Fragmentation
   may not always result in a transmissible frame: Bundle Processing
   Control Flags may prohibit fragmentation, and Block Processing
   Control Flags may require extension blocks to be replicated with
   every fragment, either of which may result in Bundle Fragments that
   exceed the Ethernet MTU.  For this reason, [BTP-U] Segmentation is
   recommended.

4.5.  Filtering

   A common security paradigm is to "default deny" all traffic patterns
   that, broadly, do not conform to operator expectations.  In such
   environments it may be that the BTP-U EtherType needs to be added to
   an allowlist or otherwise explicitly permitted to be used on a given
   Ethernet segment before BTP-U messages can be successfully delivered.

5.  Security Considerations

   This document requests assignment of an EtherType and Multicast MAC
   address for BTP-U datagrams.  It has no incremental implications for
   security beyond those in the relevant protocols.

   BTP-U assumes the sending rate is controlled by a mechanism out of
   scope for the protocol and has no builtin mechanism for identifying
   or mitigating any congestion a sender might cause.  Use of this
   protocol on some networks, a shared LAN segment for example, may
   cause a Denial-of-Service by flooding Ethernet switches and stations.

   Any attacker with access to the link, or with sufficient knowledge of
   local Bundle fordwarding configuration so as to inject BTP-U frames
   and cause them to be sent to an Ethernet peer, may overwhelm the
   receiver to the point of Denial of Service to other onlink senders.

   IEEE standards include several security mechanisms that may be used
   in Ethernet networks.  Examples of recommended Ethernet-level
   security mechanisms a network might deploy include: IEEE 802.1X
   (TODO: reference), which may be used restrict access to the link to
   authorized participants, and IEEE 802.1AE (TODO: reference), which
   would offers confidentiality of the entire BTP-U payload.

6.  References

6.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc2119>.

   [RFC8174]  Leiba, B., "Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC
              2119 Key Words", BCP 14, RFC 8174, DOI 10.17487/RFC8174,
              May 2017, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8174>.

6.2.  Informative References

   [BPv7]     Burleigh, S., Fall, K., and E. Birrane, III, "Bundle
              Protocol Version 7", RFC 9171, DOI 10.17487/RFC9171,
              January 2022, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9171>.

   [BTP-U]    Taylor, R., "Bundle Transfer Protocol - Unidirectional",
              Work in Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-ietf-dtn-btpu-01,
              5 November 2025, <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/
              draft-ietf-dtn-btpu-01>.

   [DGRAMCL]  Kruse, H., Jero, S., and S. Ostermann, "Datagram
              Convergence Layers for the Delay- and Disruption-Tolerant
              Networking (DTN) Bundle Protocol and Licklider
              Transmission Protocol (LTP)", RFC 7122,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC7122, March 2014,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc7122>.

   [RFC9542]  Eastlake 3rd, D., Abley, J., and Y. Li, "IANA
              Considerations and IETF Protocol and Documentation Usage
              for IEEE 802 Parameters", BCP 141, RFC 9542,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC9542, April 2024,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9542>.

   [TCPCL]    Sipos, B., Demmer, M., Ott, J., and S. Perreault, "Delay-
              Tolerant Networking TCP Convergence-Layer Protocol Version
              4", RFC 9174, DOI 10.17487/RFC9174, January 2022,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9174>.

Acknowledgments

   Thanks to Wes Eddy, Jeorg Ott, Brian Sipos, and Rick Taylor for
   numerous discussions and contributions.

Author's Address

   Erik Kline
   Aalyria Technologies, Inc.
   Email: ek.ietf@gmail.com
